**RESEARCH**

**On Autonomy, Nudges, and Scaffolding**

Kyle van Oosterum1,2

Received: 13 September 2025 / Revised: 11 December 2025 / Accepted: 27 December 2025 /

Published online: 14 January 2026

© The Author(s) 2026

**Abstract**

David Enoch argues that nudges undermine autonomy because they sever an important connection between sovereignty (self-rule) and non-alienation (acting in line with one's deepest commitments). I accept that nudges can sever the link, but challenge Enoch's further claim that such disruption necessarily undermines the full value of autonomy. I introduce the concept of scaffolding nudges: nudges that sever the link temporarily in order to strengthen it over time. These nudges support, rather than subvert, the realization of autonomy, thereby undermining an implicit uniformity assumption in Enoch's account. The surprising conclusion is that some nudges may have a crucial but temporary role to play in enabling agents to live autonomous lives by helping sustain the integration between sovereignty and non-alienation – a point with implications for broader debates about nudging and autonomy.

Keywords Autonomy · Nudges

**1 Introduction**

In a recent paper, Enoch (2024) provides an intriguing diagnosis for how nudges – "non-coercive interventions" that steer agents toward a decision – undermine autonomy.1 I agree with Enoch that nudging can offend against a person's autonomy. However, I disagree that nudging necessarily undermines it. Briefly, his explanation is that nudging "always" and "as a matter of necessity" (679) upsets autonomy because

<sup>2</sup> Department of Political Science & Public Policy, University College London, London, UK

<sup>1</sup> Hereafter, parentheses that only include a number refer to pages of David Enoch's article in the Journal of Philosophy which my article critically discusses.

 Kyle van Oosterum kyle.van\_oosterum@kcl.ac.uk

<sup>1</sup> Dickson Poon School of Law, King's College London, London, UK

it "severs the appropriate connection" between autonomy as "non-alienation" and autonomy as "sovereignty" (658). The extent to which autonomy is realized in an agent's life depends, in great part, on choices "manifesting non-alienation precisely in virtue of their manifesting sovereignty" (669). In short, my argument is that Enoch ignores the possibility (and great importance of) nudges that sever the link between non-alienation and sovereignty in order to strengthen it. I will call these scaffolding nudges. So-called scaffolding nudges may upset autonomy in the short run but enhance it in the long run; in other words, they may augment rather than diminish the full value of autonomy. By filling in this gap, I nevertheless hope to reinforce Enoch's picture that autonomy requires a kind of integration between non-alienation and sovereignty. But where he focuses on integration at the level of individual choice, I argue that we must consider that the integration process has a temporal aspect to it too.

Before proceeding, two clarifications are needed. First, my aim is not to develop a general theory of autonomy across time, or to map the relationship between autonomous choices and autonomous lives. The aim is narrower. I challenge a structural feature of Enoch's diagnosis, namely, that any severance that nudges create will be necessarily autonomy-diminishing in virtue of its structure. The appeal to diachronic cases is used only to reveal that Enoch's framework is mistaken as it stands, or, at the very least, incomplete until amended to include the cases I discuss.

Second, although Enoch is my direct interlocutor, the autonomy-nudging debate is far broader. A substantial literature examines when nudges undermine autonomy through manipulation, when they merely reshape choice architecture, and when they may even support autonomy (Sunstein, 2014; Mills, 2015; Schubert, 2017; Schmidt & Engelen, 2020; Vugts et al., 2020; Kuyer & Gordijn, 2023; Holmen, 2025). My argument could also therefore be read as one contribution within this larger discussion, that is, advancing the claim that a particular class of nudges has been overlooked in accounts like the one Enoch advances.2

The structure of the paper is as follows. First, I outline Enoch's core argument which I shall call the Severing Diagnosis. Second, I show that the Severing Diagnosis is vulnerable to counterexamples like scaffolding nudges. Third, I reflect on the wider relevance of scaffolding nudges to the realization of autonomy over time.

**2 The Severing Diagnosis**

Enoch's Severing Diagnosis depends on a distinction between two concepts of autonomy that he has developed over the course of a few papers (Enoch, 2017, 2020, 2022). On the one hand, agents can be autonomous in the sense of being able to shape their lives according to their deepest commitments. This is autonomy as nonalienation. On the other hand, agents can be autonomous in the sense of being able to control how their life goes. This is autonomy as sovereignty. We can see how these distinct senses of autonomy arise in Enoch's example of the generally healthconscience person who encounters a fancy dessert. If this person succumbs by temp-

<sup>2</sup> I thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting this important clarification and their reference suggestions.

tation to eating the dessert, there is a sense in which he has not acted autonomously. After all, his action does not fit with one of his deep commitments (e.g., health). But we can imagine a variant of the case where one interferes with the person's choice to eat the fancy dessert. If the person insists that they want to eat the fancy dessert and assert their autonomy, we might say that their sovereignty has been undermined even if their autonomy as non-alienation has not been similarly affected. Both nonalienation and sovereignty are important to the 'story' agents want to tell about their lives, that is, they want to exhibit a kind of free self-authorship (Raz, 1986).

What about the connection between non-alienation and sovereignty? This is where nudging comes in. Let's take another example of a Jewish person resisting some nonkosher bacon. It is plausible to say that the more 'causally' responsible an agent is for whether they stick to their deepest commitments, the more we might label such actions as exercises of autonomy. Enoch cleanly expresses this as saying that the Jewish person who resists eating bacon "manifests non-alienation precisely in virtue of manifesting sovereignty" (670). However, cases of nudging (e.g., the cafeteria owner's moving the bacon out of eyesight) disrupt the "in virtue of" relation. That is, an agent may act in line with their values, but not because she exercised sovereignty, and, in so doing, it seems that that the full value of autonomy has been diminished (670). With this, we can summarize Enoch's diagnostic argument for how nudging upsets autonomy in standard form:

 Severing Diagnosis

–––

P1: The full value of autonomy is necessarily undermined when the link between sovereignty and non-alienation is severed.

P2: Nudges necessarily sever the link between sovereignty and non-alienation.

C: Therefore, nudges necessarily undermine the full value of autonomy (via modus ponens).

Two clarifications should be raised about my summary of Enoch's Severing Diagnosis. First, I have framed this as a claim about necessity, but my critique will succeed even if his claim is that nudges generally but do not necessarily upset autonomy. Throughout the paper his argument comes quite close to a necessity claim, but I allow for this weaker interpretation as a matter of dialectical charity. Second, and relatedly, Enoch operates with a scalar conception of autonomy. This means that he does not claim that nudges make one's choices autonomous or not, but that they can make it less autonomous. I will come back to this point in the next section. What is crucial for now is that my argument below rejects P1. If P1 is false, then the conclusion does not follow. In other words, nudging will not necessarily undermine the full value of autonomy. In some cases, it may even support it.

**3 Scaffolding Nudges**

To be clear, my critique accepts P2, namely, that nudges necessarily sever the link between sovereignty and non-alienation.3 However, the consequences of such severances may differ significantly. I suggest that this is because there are two general kinds of nudges. The one Enoch focuses on are subversive nudges. These are nudges that disrupt the link between non-alienation and sovereignty, full stop. The only thing they do is subvert the full realization of autonomy in the structural manner Enoch lays out. However, some nudges might disrupt the link between non-alienation and sovereignty in order to strengthen the link.4 Consider the following case

Strava. Sam cares deeply about maintaining his own health. He hasn't taken up running though he knows this would be good for him to do. A friend gives him a new smartphone on which a fitness app (Strava) is already pre-installed and set as the default exercise tracker, with gentle push notifications enabled (e.g., 'Ready for your daily run?'). Sam can easily disable or delete these defaults, but he does not. Initially prompted by these default settings, he begins running. After several weeks, he discovers he enjoys the habit and turns off the notifications; he continues running without any external prompting.

What should we make of Sam's choice to start running? I would argue that the smartphone with pre-installed Strava constitutes a nudge.5 Moreover, were it not for these nudges, we can assume that Sam might not have gotten around to running to improve his health. In a very real way, the nudge has upset the link between non-alienation and sovereignty; in Enoch's terms, Sam's runs manifest non-alienation but not in virtue of or because of sovereignty.

<sup>5</sup> Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for helping me refine this example to include a classic 'default-setting' nudge (Thaler & Sunstein, 2008).

<sup>3</sup> One anonymous reviewer raised the helpful suggestion that whether a nudge disrupts autonomy as sovereignty may depend on its resistibility (see Saghai, 2013; Calboli, 2025). For critique of this idea, see Kipper (2021)). On this view, a nudge that can be easily resisted may not diminish an agent's control over their actions and thus may not sever the sovereignty element of autonomy. I can readily accept this point. My argument could be formed conditionally: even when a nudge does sever the relation between sovereignty and non-alienation, whether because it is not easily resistible or for some other reason, Enoch's further claim does not follow. Such severances need not uniformly diminish the full value of autonomy. Scaffolding nudges show that some severances, when they occur, may contribute to strengthening the relevant autonomy relation over time. Nothing in the present argument depends on settling the independent question of when, exactly, sovereignty is disrupted.

<sup>4</sup> The point of introducing scaffolding nudges is conceptual rather than empirical. I am not committed to any specific psychological model of how temporary disruptions in sovereignty might ultimately strengthen the link between sovereignty and non-alienation. Nevertheless, the idea that temporary external support can help cultivate stable self-governed capacities is well recognized in developmental psychology. For instance, the educational psychologist Lev Vygotsky's (1978) notion of the 'zone of proximal development' suggests that temporary scaffolding can enable agents to develop abilities that they could not yet exercise independently. I mention this only to indicate that scaffolding nudges are psychologically intelligible, not to base the argument on any empirical thesis. Nothing in the critique of Enoch's severing diagnosis depends on the truth of any particular empirical mechanism.

Notice, however, that the disruption is temporary. Once Sam recognizes that running expresses his deepest commitments, he no longer needs the nudge. The scaffold, as it were, can be removed and the strengthened link between sovereignty and nonalienation remains. It might be true that his first few runs were not fully autonomous. Yet this does not entail that his autonomy is diminished, or that his eventual choice to be a runner cannot be fully autonomous. Rather, the nudge helps Sam realize what he was already committed to through the mechanism of a temporary disruption to sovereignty.6

Crucially, this shows that the mere fact of severance does not have the uniform autonomy-diminishing effect that Enoch's structural diagnosis predicted. In this case, the nudge promotes the full value of autonomy precisely because it briefly severed the link. This demonstrates that P1 is false. Therefore, the conclusion of the Severing Diagnosis, namely, that nudges necessarily undermine the full value of autonomy must be invalid.

Enoch might resist the force of this counterexample by pointing to the special relationship that Sam has with his friends. Here's a second counterexample that removes that feature:

Organ Donation. Sam intends to register as an organ donor but repeatedly forgets. His government introduces a gentle behavioural nudge: when filing taxes online, a small checkbox appears by default expressing an organ-donor preference (which says, for example, 'you can change this preference at any time'). Sam notices it, reflects on his long-standing commitment, and confirms the choice. Afterward, he removes the default reminder from his settings.

What should we make of this example? Again, we see a disruption of the 'in-virtueof' relation where an agent, with no special relationship to the nudger, acts in line with his values but not because of sovereignty. Yet, crucially, the disruption strengthens the long-term link between sovereignty and non-alienation. Sam is no longer hesitating or procrastinating to act on his deepest commitments. For individuals like Sam, the scaffolding nudge no longer needs to operate because it has translated an existing commitment of his into action.

Interestingly, Enoch would likely diagnose the organ-donation case in the same way he diagnoses other nudges: as a case where the agent's action still falls short of the full ideal of autonomy (680). He would say that even if such a nudge is less autonomy-diminishing than more intrusive interventions (e.g., mandating organ donation), it nevertheless diminishes autonomy to some degree. But this conclusion does not easily follow. Treating all severances of the link between sovereignty and non-alienation as autonomy-undermining but 'differing only in degree' reflects a normatively blunt feature of Enoch's account. There is a profound structural difference between nudges that weaken the autonomy link full stop and nudges that sever the link in order

<sup>6</sup> This can be related to the idea that nudges can free up a person's 'mental bandwidth' and enable them to live in line with their commitments. For a discussion of how nudges can free up mental bandwidth in the context of moral nudging see (Engelen & Nys, 2024). Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out this connection.

to strengthen it. Even his discussion of the intention of nudgers seems not to capture the category of scaffolding nudges. As a result, Enoch's model overlooks how the full realization of autonomy sometimes requires precisely the kind of temporary disruption that scaffolding nudges introduce.

Another concern one might have about a scaffolding nudge in the Strava case is that it works by helping agents establishing habits, and it might be argued that habitual action is not fully autonomous in the sense of sovereignty. However, this objection is arguably overstated. Many autonomous activities – such as playing an instrument, maintaining friendships etc. – depend on cultivated habits that support rather than undermine self-governance. A habit can express sovereignty when it stabilises the agent's capacity to act in accordance with her values without requiring constant deliberative efforts. Scaffolding nudges might operate precisely in this way. They facilitate the formation of dispositions that later allow an agent to exercise both non-alienation and sovereignty more fully.

Before turning to the broader implications of the distinction between these nudges, it is worth clarifying the structure of my challenge to Enoch's Severing Diagnosis. The point is not the familiar and rather uninteresting observation that values admit synchronic-diachronic trade-offs, where a temporary setback may facilitate greater fulfilment over time. Nothing in Enoch's view depends on denying this general possibility. Rather, Enoch's diagnosis presupposes a much stronger uniformity claim: that whenever a nudge severs the link between sovereignty and non-alienation, this severance is necessarily autonomy-diminishing in virtue of its structure. Enoch's point is that a nudge's mechanism of disruption is supposed to be conceptually autonomyundermining, not merely a local or temporary cost.

Scaffolding nudges undermine this uniformity assumption. They demonstrate that some severances, either by design or by effect, strengthen the relation between sovereignty and non-alienation (over time) because of the temporary disruption they introduce. This reveals that Enoch's structural explanation is false or, at the very least, incomplete. Not all severances bear the same significance for autonomy, and his account does not accommodate the category of severances that are autonomyenhancing rather than autonomy-reducing (e.g., as seen in Strava).

**4 The Value of Scaffolding Nudges**

Let's recap. We can accept that Enoch is right about how nudges upset the link between non-alienation and sovereignty without being committed to the view that nudges necessarily undermine the full value of autonomy. This means that the Severing Diagnosis as it has been laid out needs to be carefully qualified. Applied to subversive nudges, the argument goes through. Applied to scaffolding nudges, it does not.

Does the distinction between these nudges say something about the moral permissibility of nudging? Like Enoch, this is not the focus of my paper. However, one unique feature about scaffolding nudges bears mentioning. Whereas subversive nudges can seem pro tanto problematic for autonomy due simply to their implementation, the same is not true of scaffolding nudges. Interestingly, what makes scaffolding

nudges problematic has more to do with whether they remain in place when they are no longer needed. Perhaps, once a scaffolding nudge has played this temporary role in bolstering autonomy – through the temporary disruption it causes – then it should be removed. For example, in Strava, Sam might ignore the app after forming the habit but continued prompting could also become intrusive or even undermine his sense of autonomy. He might begin to feel that he runs because the app says so, rather than because he chooses to do so. This suggests that a scaffolding nudge, once it has served its role, should ideally be removable. Left in place, it could risk creating friction between sovereignty and non-alienation, which is the very link scaffolding was meant to strengthen.

This raises an interesting question: what kinds of considerations are relevant to permissible scaffolding nudges? In the best-case scenario, they would be temporary (i.e., easily withdrawn), responsive to the nudged person's will and perhaps meet some proportionality constraint (i.e., the severance is proportionate to the autonomy gains, and the nudged person should be the judge of that). Even so, I am reluctant to normatively endorse scaffolding nudges wholesale and, again, the point of the paper is not to morally justify them. Funnily enough, this reiterates a point Enoch makes about nudges which is that they are "never perfect" (681) even in the "autonomybest-case" scenario. I agree. But I think this insight extends to scaffolding nudges which overstay their welcome.

The ethical rationale for avoiding subversive nudges and permitting carefully circumscribed scaffolding nudges is the same: to bolster the appropriate integration of non-alienation and sovereignty to enable the fuller realization of autonomy.7 In this respect, both Enoch and I are climbing the 'autonomy mountain' from different sides. However, what my critique adds is an important diachronic dimension. If autonomy is fully realized when a "special relation" is maintained between non-alienation and sovereignty (671), then it matters how the relation is sustained – or restored– over time.

Enoch might agree in principle but point out that his examples explain how nudging upsets autonomy synchronically (i.e., at the moment of choice). A more direct critique would identify counterexamples to the Severing Diagnosis on synchronic grounds. I have two responses to this worry. First, at many points in the paper Enoch refers to the autonomous life and not just autonomously made choices (658, 665, 666). This is likely because he and many philosophers agree that autonomy matters in both synchronic and diachronic contexts.

Secondly, the focus on the diachronic case reveals an interesting blind spot: we cannot take the autonomy-upsetting consequences of nudges in isolation from the temporal context. What may appear to be a subversive nudge could, in fact, be a scaffolding nudge with an important role to play in helping an agent manifest nonalienation precisely because of the temporary disruption in sovereignty. This directly challenges Enoch's assumption that any severance will have a uniform, autonomy-

<sup>7</sup> One might think that the discussion here tracks not just how nudges upset autonomy but the ideal of integrity, i.e., keeping the self intact and uncorrupted by external influences (Cox et al., 2021). It may be that 'integrity' is the concept that Enoch gestures toward when he speaks of the 'special relationship' between non-alienation and sovereignty.

diminishing significance. It may also shift the moral evaluation of nudges insofar as nudges play a legitimate scaffolding function that augment the full value of autonomy in an agent's life. Still, whether we focus on the scaffolding nudges discussed here, or the subversive ones Enoch has in mind, much more will need to be said to reach a verdict on their pro tanto permissibility.

Indeed, one might worry that if scaffolding nudges are regarded as morally permissible, this could easily be abused by individuals who claim to interfere with autonomy only to 'enhance' autonomy. To be completely clear, this paper neither endorses nor denies the permissibility of scaffolding nudges. Perhaps this worry constitutes a decisive reason against their permissibility in practice.

In any case, scaffolding nudges nevertheless remain a decisive counterexample to Enoch's Severing Diagnosis regardless of whether they are ultimately morally justifiable. Again, this is because they upset the uniformity assumption Enoch makes about the impact of nudging on the full value of autonomy.

**5 Conclusion**

In conclusion, Enoch rightly emphasizes the importance of maintaining a link between non-alienation and sovereignty. But that link is maintained and sometimes restored over time. Scaffolding nudges show that temporary severances can strengthen rather than weaken this link, thereby enhancing the full value of autonomy. Once the diachronic dimension is recognized, the autonomy-undermining effect of nudges cannot be treated as uniform.

Acknowledgements I am thankful to UKRI for research funding (UKRI grant MR/V025600/1) and to the Yeoh Tiong Lay Foundation at King's College London for their continued support.

Author Contributions All planning, research, and drafting of the article was done by KVO.

Data Availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

**Declarations**

Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit [http://creativecommons.org/licen](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) [ses/by/4.0/](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

**References**

- Calboli, S. (2025). Autonomy and AI nudges: Distinguishing concepts and highlighting AI's advantages. Philosophy & Technology, 38(3), 116. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-025-00940-2>
- Cox, D., La Caze, M., & Levine, M. (2021). Integrity. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Ed., E.N. Zalta. Available at: <https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/integrity/>
- Engelen, B., & Nys, T. (2024). Pushed for being better: On the possibility and desirability of moral nudging. Journal of Value Inquiry. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10790-023-09977-yy>
- Enoch, D. (2017). Hypothetical consent and the value(s) of autonomy. Ethics, 128(1), 6–36. [https://doi.o](https://doi.org/10.1086/692939) [rg/10.1086/692939](https://doi.org/10.1086/692939)
- Enoch, D. (2020). False consciousness for liberals, part I: Consent, autonomy, and adaptive preferences. The Philosophical Review, 129(2), 159–210. <https://doi.org/10.1215/00318108-8012836>
- Enoch, D. (2022). Autonomy as non-alienation, autonomy as sovereignty, and politics. Journal of Political Philosophy, 30*(2), 143–165. <https://doi.org/10.1111/jopp.12264>
- Enoch, D. (2024). How nudging upsets autonomy. The Journal of Philosophy, 121(12), 657–685. [https://](https://doi.org/10.5840/jphil20241211241) [doi.org/10.5840/jphil20241211241](https://doi.org/10.5840/jphil20241211241)
- Holmen, S. J. (2025). Self-regulation, autonomy, rationality, and the use of arational influences to prevent crime. Criminal Justice Ethics, 44(2), 182–206. <https://doi.org/10.1080/0731129X.2025.2530278>
- Kipper, J. (2021). Irresistible nudges, inevitable nudges, and the freedom to choose. Moral Philosophy and Politics, 8(2), 285–303. <https://doi.org/10.1515/mopp-2020-0013>
- Kuyer, P., & Gordijn, B. (2023). Nudge in perspective: A systematic literature review on the ethical issues with nudging. Rationality and Society, 35(2), 191–230. <https://doi.org/10.1177/10434631231155005>
- Mills, C. (2015). The heteronomy of choice architecture. Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 6(3), 495–509. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-015-0242-7>
- Raz, J. (1986). The morality of freedom. Clarendon Press.
- Saghai, Y. (2013). Salvaging the concept of nudge. Journal of Medical Ethics, 39(8), 487–493. [https://doi](https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2012-100727) [.org/10.1136/medethics-2012-100727](https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2012-100727)
- Schmidt, A. T., & Engelen, B. (2020). The ethics of nudging: An overview. Philosophy Compass, 15(4). <https://doi.org/10.1111/phc3.12658>
- Schubert, C. (2017). Green nudges: Do they work? Are they ethical? Ecological Economics, 132, 329–342. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.11.009>
- Sunstein, C. (2014). Why nudge? The politics of Libertarian paternalism. Yale University Press.
- Thaler, R., & Sunstein, C. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about Health, Wealth, and happiness. Yale University Press.
- Vugts, A., van den Hoven, Mariëtte., de Vet Emely., & Verweij M. (2020). How autonomy is understood in discussions on the ethics of nudging. Behavioural public policy (pp. 108–123). Cambridge University Press. <https://doi.org/10.1017/bpp.2018.5>
- Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Harvard University Press.

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.